Improvements to applied state metadata (#5089)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/core/connect-data-platform/about-core-connections.md

If you're using dbt from the command line (CLI), you'll need a profiles.yml file that contains the connection details for your data platform. When you run dbt from the CLI, it reads your dbt_project.yml file to find the profile name, and then looks for a profile with the same name in your profiles.yml file. This profile contains all the information dbt needs to connect to your data platform.

For detailed info, you can refer to the [Connection profiles](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/connection-profiles).

> ## Adapter features

Reviewer: Also - do we want a 1.7 version block here?

The following table lists the features available for adapters:

| Adapter | Catalog | Source freshness |
|---------|---------|------------------|
| dbt default configuration | manual run | `loaded_at` field |

> | `dbt-bigquery` | incremental | metadata-based |

Reviewer: Anything that has `metadata-based` source freshness _also_ can configure it via the `loaded_at` field - I don't think that's currently clear

Reviewer: Same note for catalog features

Author: @graciegoheen , clarifying question: what should be added for the catalog features?

Reviewer: If an adapter supports `incremental`/`partial` catalog generation, it also support full - not actually sure what "manual run" means here?

Author: thanks for the clarification!

| `dbt-databricks` | manual run | metadata-based |
| `dbt-postgres` | incremental | `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-redshift` | incremental | metadata-based |
| `dbt-snowflake` | incremental | metadata-based |
| `dbt-spark` | manual run | `loaded_at` field |

### Catalog 

> You can build the catalog incrementally for adapters that support it. This allows for the catalog to be built along with the model, which eliminates the need to run a lengthy `dbt docs generate --select ...` at the end of a dbt run. For adapters that don't support incremental catalog generation, you must run `dbt docs generate --select ...` to build the catalog.

Reviewer: "incrementally" feels like a loaded word (makes me think of incremental materialization) - can we change this to something more distinct like "partial catalog"?

Author: great flag re: overloaded term! this sets things up nicely for translation (future proofing)

### Source freshness

> You can measure source freshness using the metadata when the adapter supports it. This allows for calculating source freshness without using the `loaded_at` field and without querying the table directly. This is faster and more flexible. You can override this with the `loaded_at` field in the model config. If the adapter doesn't support this, you can still use the `loaded_at` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can measure source freshness using the warehouse metadata tables when the adapter supports it. This allows for calculating source freshness without using the `loaded_at` field and without querying the table directly. This is faster and more flexible. You can override this with the `loaded_at` field in the model config. If the adapter doesn't support this, you can still use the `loaded_at` field.
```

> You can measure source freshness using the metadata when the adapter supports it. This allows for calculating source freshness without using the `loaded_at` field and without querying the table directly. This is faster and more flexible. You can override this with the `loaded_at` field in the model config. If the adapter doesn't support this, you can still use the `loaded_at` field.

Reviewer: "faster and more flexible"

I feel like we're leaving out the caveat that this may not always be accurate

Author: thanks! 

@graciegoheen clarifying question: at what times might it not be accurate? would love to add an example for the user's understanding

Reviewer: Sure - as one example, the way this works for Snowflake is we check the `LAST_ALTERED` column in the `INFORMATION_SCHEMA` which is actually updated even if a DML command updates 0 records in the target table.

https://community.snowflake.com/s/article/Column-LAST-ALTERED-in-TABLES-view-gets-updated-when-a-query-attempts-to-update-the-tale-without-updating-any-rows

https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-snowflake/issues/785#issuecomment-1737366027

Author: @graciegoheen : thanks for those links! 

i read through them, grokked as much as i could, and updated the draft with generic phrasing. lemme know what you think!

If you're using dbt from the command line (CLI), you'll need a profiles.yml file that contains the connection details for your data platform. When you run dbt from the CLI, it reads your dbt_project.yml file to find the profile name, and then looks for a profile with the same name in your profiles.yml file. This profile contains all the information dbt needs to connect to your data platform.

For detailed info, you can refer to the [Connection profiles](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/connection-profiles).

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.7">

## Adapter features

The following table lists the features available for adapters:

| Adapter | Catalog | Source freshness |
|---------|---------|------------------|
| dbt default configuration | full | `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-bigquery` | partial and full | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-databricks` | full | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-postgres` | partial and full | `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-redshift` | partial and full | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-snowflake` | partial and full | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-spark` | full | `loaded_at` field |

### Catalog 

> For adapters that support it, you can partially build the catalog. This allows the catalog to be built for only a select number of models via `dbt docs generate --select ...`. For adapters that don't support partial catalog generation, you must run `dbt docs generate` to build the entire (full) catalog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For adapters that support it, you can partially build the catalog. This allows the catalog to be built for only a select number of models via `dbt docs generate --select ...`. For adapters that don't support partial catalog generation, you must run `dbt docs generate` to build the full catalog.
```

### Source freshness

> You can measure source freshness using the warehouse metadata tables when the adapter supports it. This allows for calculating source freshness without using the `loaded_at` field and without querying the table directly. This is faster and more flexible (though it might be inaccurate at times, depending on how the warehouse tracks altered tables). You can override this with the `loaded_at` field in the model config. If the adapter doesn't support this, you can still use the `loaded_at` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can measure source freshness using the warehouse metadata tables on supported adapters. This allows for calculating source freshness without using the `loaded_at` field and without querying the table directly. This is faster and more flexible (though it might sometimes be inaccurate, depending on how the warehouse tracks altered tables). You can override this with the `loaded_at` field in the model config. If the adapter doesn't support this, you can still use the `loaded_at` field.
```

If you're using dbt from the command line (CLI), you'll need a profiles.yml file that contains the connection details for your data platform. When you run dbt from the CLI, it reads your dbt_project.yml file to find the profile name, and then looks for a profile with the same name in your profiles.yml file. This profile contains all the information dbt needs to connect to your data platform.

For detailed info, you can refer to the [Connection profiles](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/connection-profiles).

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.7">

## Adapter features

The following table lists the features available for adapters:

> | Adapter | Catalog | Source freshness |
> |---------|---------|------------------|
> | dbt default configuration | manual run | `loaded_at` field |
> | `dbt-bigquery` | incremental | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
> | `dbt-databricks` | manual run | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
> | `dbt-postgres` | incremental | `loaded_at` field |
> | `dbt-redshift` | incremental | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
> | `dbt-snowflake` | incremental | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
> | `dbt-spark` | manual run | `loaded_at` field |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Adapter | Catalog | Source freshness |
|---------|---------|------------------|
| dbt default configuration | full | `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-bigquery` | partial and full | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-databricks` | full | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-postgres` | partial and full | `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-redshift` | partial and full | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-snowflake` | partial and full | metadata-based and `loaded_at` field |
| `dbt-spark` | full | `loaded_at` field |
```

### Catalog 

> For adapters that support it, you can partially build the catalog. This allows for the catalog to be built along with the model, eliminating the need to run a lengthy `dbt docs generate --select ...` at the end of a dbt run. For adapters that don't support incremental catalog generation, you must run `dbt docs generate --select ...` to build the catalog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For adapters that support it, you can partially build the catalog. This allows for the catalog to be built for only a select number of models, by running `dbt docs generate --select ...`. For adapters that don't support partial catalog generation, you must run the full `dbt docs generate` to build the entire catalog.
```
